README.md, before:

# taon
[![CI Status](https://github.com/eiri/taon/actions/workflows/test.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/eiri/taon/actions/workflows/test.yaml)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/eiri/taon)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/eiri/taon)

Transform JSON into ASCII table.

## Installation

`taon` is a stand-alone cli utility. You can just [download a binary](https://github.com/eiri/taon/releases) and run it.

Drop the binary in your `$PATH` (e.g. `~/bin`) to make it easy to use.

## Usage

### Reading

Read a JSON array from a file:

```bash
$ taon pkg/taon/testdata/example.json
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
| bool  | count | number | seq | word                |
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
| false | 0001  | 779    | 1   | electrophototherapy |
| true  | 0002  | 700    | 2   | twatterlight        |
| false | 0003  | 310    | 3   | phlebograph         |
| false | 0004  | 742    | 4   | Ervipiame           |
| false | 0005  | 841    | 5   | annexational        |
| true  | 0006  | 352    | 6   | unjewel             |
| true  | 0007  | 852    | 7   | Anglic              |
| true  | 0008  | 818    | 8   | alliable            |
| true  | 0009  | 822    | 9   | seraphism           |
| true  | 0010  | 822    | 10  | congenialize        |
| false | 0011  | 549    | 11  | phu                 |
| false | 0012  | 777    | 12  | vial                |
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
```

or from a cURL output:

```bash
$ curl -s https://github.com/eiri/taon/blob/main/pkg/taon/testdata/example.json | taon
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
| bool  | count | number | seq | word                |
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
| false | 0001  | 779    | 1   | electrophototherapy |
| true  | 0002  | 700    | 2   | twatterlight        |
| false | 0003  | 310    | 3   | phlebograph         |
| false | 0004  | 742    | 4   | Ervipiame           |
| false | 0005  | 841    | 5   | annexational        |
| true  | 0006  | 352    | 6   | unjewel             |
| true  | 0007  | 852    | 7   | Anglic              |
| true  | 0008  | 818    | 8   | alliable            |
| true  | 0009  | 822    | 9   | seraphism           |
| true  | 0010  | 822    | 10  | congenialize        |
| false | 0011  | 549    | 11  | phu                 |
| false | 0012  | 777    | 12  | vial                |
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
```

_Note: By default `taon` sorts columns alphabetically by a name to preserve order's stability. To explicitly define the order of the columns use `--columns` flag with comma separated list of the names_

### Reading JSON objects

For objects `taon` builds a table with `keys` and `values` columns, instead of trying to present each object's key as a column.

Rows are sorted by key or printed in the order defined with `--columns` flag, same as the columns when reading JSON arrays.

```bash
$ jq '.[0]' pkg/taon/testdata/example.json | taon
+--------+---------------------+
| keys   | values              |
+--------+---------------------+
| bool   | false               |
| count  | 0001                |
| number | 779                 |
| seq    | 1                   |
| word   | electrophototherapy |
+--------+---------------------+
```

### Filtering

Filter columns to a given list in the specified order:

```bash
$ taon -c seq,word,bool pkg/taon/testdata/example.json
+-----+---------------------+-------+
| seq | word                | bool  |
+-----+---------------------+-------+
| 1   | electrophototherapy | false |
| 2   | twatterlight        | true  |
| 3   | phlebograph         | false |
| 4   | Ervipiame           | false |
| 5   | annexational        | false |
| 6   | unjewel             | true  |
| 7   | Anglic              | true  |
| 8   | alliable            | true  |
| 9   | seraphism           | true  |
| 10  | congenialize        | true  |
| 11  | phu                 | false |
| 12  | vial                | false |
+-----+---------------------+-------+

$ jq '.[0]' pkg/taon/testdata/example.json | taon -c seq,word,bool
+------+---------------------+
| keys | values              |
+------+---------------------+
| seq  | 1                   |
| word | electrophototherapy |
| bool | false               |
+------+---------------------+
```

### Markdown

Print a table as markdown:

```bash
$ taon --columns seq,word,bool --markdown pkg/taon/testdata/example.json
| seq | word                | bool  |
|-----|---------------------|-------|
| 1   | electrophototherapy | false |
| 2   | twatterlight        | true  |
| 3   | phlebograph         | false |
| 4   | Ervipiame           | false |
| 5   | annexational        | false |
| 6   | unjewel             | true  |
| 7   | Anglic              | true  |
| 8   | alliable            | true  |
| 9   | seraphism           | true  |
| 10  | congenialize        | true  |
| 11  | phu                 | false |
| 12  | vial                | false |

$ jq '.[0]' pkg/taon/testdata/example.json | taon --columns seq,word,bool --markdown
| keys | values              |
|------|---------------------|
| seq  | 1                   |
| word | electrophototherapy |
| bool | false               |
```

### Limitations

`taon` only works with objects or arrays of objects, passing in an array of arbitrary data will return an error.

## Help

```bash
$ taon --help
Transform JSON into ASCII table

Usage: taon [flags] [file]

Flags:
  -c, --columns=COL1,COL2  List of columns to display
  -m, --markdown           Print as markdown table
  -h, --help               Show help
      --version            Show application version

Args:
  <file>                   Path to file to read, stdin when missing
```

## Licence

[MIT](https://github.com/eiri/taon/blob/master/LICENSE)

Commit message:

docs: update README with homebrew instructions

README.md, after:

# taon
[![CI Status](https://github.com/eiri/taon/actions/workflows/test.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/eiri/taon/actions/workflows/test.yaml)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/eiri/taon)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/eiri/taon)

Transform JSON into ASCII table.

## Installation

### MacOS

Install using [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/).

Tap `eiri/tap` with `brew tap eiri/tap` and then run `brew install taon` or just run `brew install eiri/tap/taon`. To update run `brew update` and then `brew upgrade taon`.

### Linux and Windows

Since `taon` is just a single binary [download the latest release](https://github.com/eiri/taon/releases) and place it in your `$PATH`.

## Usage

### Reading

Read a JSON array from a file:

```bash
$ taon pkg/taon/testdata/example.json
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
| bool  | count | number | seq | word                |
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
| false | 0001  | 779    | 1   | electrophototherapy |
| true  | 0002  | 700    | 2   | twatterlight        |
| false | 0003  | 310    | 3   | phlebograph         |
| false | 0004  | 742    | 4   | Ervipiame           |
| false | 0005  | 841    | 5   | annexational        |
| true  | 0006  | 352    | 6   | unjewel             |
| true  | 0007  | 852    | 7   | Anglic              |
| true  | 0008  | 818    | 8   | alliable            |
| true  | 0009  | 822    | 9   | seraphism           |
| true  | 0010  | 822    | 10  | congenialize        |
| false | 0011  | 549    | 11  | phu                 |
| false | 0012  | 777    | 12  | vial                |
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
```

or from a cURL output:

```bash
$ curl -s https://github.com/eiri/taon/blob/main/pkg/taon/testdata/example.json | taon
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
| bool  | count | number | seq | word                |
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
| false | 0001  | 779    | 1   | electrophototherapy |
| true  | 0002  | 700    | 2   | twatterlight        |
| false | 0003  | 310    | 3   | phlebograph         |
| false | 0004  | 742    | 4   | Ervipiame           |
| false | 0005  | 841    | 5   | annexational        |
| true  | 0006  | 352    | 6   | unjewel             |
| true  | 0007  | 852    | 7   | Anglic              |
| true  | 0008  | 818    | 8   | alliable            |
| true  | 0009  | 822    | 9   | seraphism           |
| true  | 0010  | 822    | 10  | congenialize        |
| false | 0011  | 549    | 11  | phu                 |
| false | 0012  | 777    | 12  | vial                |
+-------+-------+--------+-----+---------------------+
```

_Note: By default `taon` sorts columns alphabetically by a name to preserve order's stability. To explicitly define the order of the columns use `--columns` flag with comma separated list of the names_

### Reading JSON objects

For objects `taon` builds a table with `keys` and `values` columns, instead of trying to present each object's key as a column.

Rows are sorted by key or printed in the order defined with `--columns` flag, same as the columns when reading JSON arrays.

```bash
$ jq '.[0]' pkg/taon/testdata/example.json | taon
+--------+---------------------+
| keys   | values              |
+--------+---------------------+
| bool   | false               |
| count  | 0001                |
| number | 779                 |
| seq    | 1                   |
| word   | electrophototherapy |
+--------+---------------------+
```

### Filtering

Filter columns to a given list in the specified order:

```bash
$ taon -c seq,word,bool pkg/taon/testdata/example.json
+-----+---------------------+-------+
| seq | word                | bool  |
+-----+---------------------+-------+
| 1   | electrophototherapy | false |
| 2   | twatterlight        | true  |
| 3   | phlebograph         | false |
| 4   | Ervipiame           | false |
| 5   | annexational        | false |
| 6   | unjewel             | true  |
| 7   | Anglic              | true  |
| 8   | alliable            | true  |
| 9   | seraphism           | true  |
| 10  | congenialize        | true  |
| 11  | phu                 | false |
| 12  | vial                | false |
+-----+---------------------+-------+

$ jq '.[0]' pkg/taon/testdata/example.json | taon -c seq,word,bool
+------+---------------------+
| keys | values              |
+------+---------------------+
| seq  | 1                   |
| word | electrophototherapy |
| bool | false               |
+------+---------------------+
```

### Markdown

Print a table as markdown:

```bash
$ taon --columns seq,word,bool --markdown pkg/taon/testdata/example.json
| seq | word                | bool  |
|-----|---------------------|-------|
| 1   | electrophototherapy | false |
| 2   | twatterlight        | true  |
| 3   | phlebograph         | false |
| 4   | Ervipiame           | false |
| 5   | annexational        | false |
| 6   | unjewel             | true  |
| 7   | Anglic              | true  |
| 8   | alliable            | true  |
| 9   | seraphism           | true  |
| 10  | congenialize        | true  |
| 11  | phu                 | false |
| 12  | vial                | false |

$ jq '.[0]' pkg/taon/testdata/example.json | taon --columns seq,word,bool --markdown
| keys | values              |
|------|---------------------|
| seq  | 1                   |
| word | electrophototherapy |
| bool | false               |
```

### Limitations

`taon` only works with objects or arrays of objects, passing in an array of arbitrary data will return an error.

## Help

```bash
$ taon --help
Transform JSON into ASCII table

Usage: taon [flags] [file]

Flags:
  -c, --columns=COL1,COL2  List of columns to display
  -m, --markdown           Print as markdown table
  -h, --help               Show help
      --version            Show application version

Args:
  <file>                   Path to file to read, stdin when missing
```

## Licence

[MIT](https://github.com/eiri/taon/blob/master/LICENSE)
